### W200: Introduction to Data Science Programming 

### Getting Started with Jupyter

There are several ways to run Python.  The best method depends on what kind of work you're doing: for example, whether you're running a production system for the public, or digging through a data set to understand what's happening.

For modern data science work, a lot of people write their Python code in something called Jupyter notebooks.  Let's take a look at one.

I've installed Anaconda on my local machine, so I can start Jupyter from my command line.   Before I start, I might want to switch environments to get the specific packages I need.  For today, I can use the default environment.

I normally switch to my Desktop or some folder that contains all of my work.

Then I type either jupyter notebook, or jupyter lab.  These are two different interfaces, I usually use jupyter lab, which is newer.

```
jupyter lab
```

I have to leave my terminal window open - if I close it, jupyter will stop working.  If you access jupyter on a server, you don't have to worry about that.

A notebook is designed for both programming and communication.  It's made up of cells.

You can already see one cell here.  I'll make a couple more by hitting the + button.

Right now, I'm in command mode, which means I can't type anything into these cells.  If I hit the up or down arrow, I can move around the cells.

At the moment, all of these cells are code cells.  You can see that this dropdown says "code."

To actually type code, I need to enter edit mode.  I can do that by double-clicking on a cell.  I can also hit the enter button.  If I need to come back out to command mode, I use ESC.

I'll hit enter again, and I can enter some Python.

`7+7`

To execute, I can hit the play button.  There's also a keyboard shortcut, which you should memorize.  it's shift-enter.  

The code is given to the python interpreter.  The interpreter executes all the code in the cell, and returns some output, which gets displayed underneath.

If I want to share this code with others, I need to include some explanation.  That's what markdown cells are for.

I can switch the first cell to a markdown if I highlight it, then use this dropdown.  There's a also a shortcut.  If you're in command mode, just type m.

Now I need to enter edit mode, so I'll hit return. 

```
Juptyer Notebook Orientation

These are some useful techniques.
```

After I type, I can hit the execute button to run, or I can again type shift-enter.

Markdown is a simple language that you can use to style your text.   for example, I can add a # to make a title.  I can use * to italicize a word.

If you look in the help menu, you can pull up a helpful short help page for markdown.  It's worth spending a few minutes here to get familiar with everything.

There's a lot more to learn, but those are the basics that you need to get started with Jupyter.