### W200: Introduction to Data Science Programming 

### Make a Conda environment and requirements.txt file

For this lesson, we will be creating a **conda virtual environment**. Virtual environments are important for programming projects because they manage package dependencies.  We will discuss packages, modules and dependencies more later, but let’s just say that each programming project requires a different set of Python packages (sets of programs), and these sets can be incompatible. An environment lets you run compatible sets of packages together and keep them away from other environments. 

Why is this important? If you are running a Python program in production, you don't want the program to 'break' or become unusable when new updates are made to the underlying packages that you are using. To ensure the program doesn't break, we can setup the environment to always use the same packages. Another example, is when you are working on a project with many different programmers. Each programmer could setup their own environment but if each uses different versions of a library, incompatibilities or other problems could occur. Instead by creating one environment for everyone to use, these problems are alleviated.

```
1 - Build an environment

2 - Practice switching in and out of the environment

3 -	List the component packages in the ‘requirements.txt’
```

Use a command line - I do this:
1.	 Create an environment:
```
conda create --name myenv
```

2.	When conda asks you to proceed, type 'y':
	
```proceed ([y]/n)?```

	This creates the myenv environment in /envs/. No packages will be installed in this environment.
	

3. To switch in or out of environments in Anaconda use conda activate and deactivate. As you switch in and out of environments note how the CLI prompt (parenthesis to the far left) changes to indicate that you have moved from base to myenv.

```
For conda versions 4.6 and later, use:
  conda activate and conda deactivate
```

4. Create an environment with a specific version of Python:
```
conda create -n myenv python=3.7
```

5.	Create an environment with a specific package:
```
conda create -n myenv scipy
```

6.	Create an environment with a specific version of a package:
```
conda create -n myenv scipy=1.5.0
```

7.	To create an environment with a specific version of Python and multiple packages:
```
conda create -n myenv python=3.7 scipy=1.5.0
```
8. Once in your environment, we can use the conda install command to install other libraries if they are needed:

   `conda install pandas`

9. The requirements.txt is a list of all the packages in that environment and it allows you to share your dependencies with consumers of your code. Make sure that you are inside the environment that you just made and use this command. 

```
conda list -e > requirements.txt
type requirements.txt
cat requirements.txt
```

10. To list all of your environments (star is the current activated one):

```
conda env list
```

