# Windows Computer Setup Guide for DATASCI 200

## Preamble 

### About
This guide will help you get your computer setup for development on Windows through Windows Subsystem for Linux 2 (WSL2). It is opinionated, and is not the only way of doing development on Windows for this class. However, if you choose to venture off the beaten path the instruction team can only provide limited support for user specific issues. 

### What is WSL2? 
WSL2, aka Windows through Windows Subsystem for Linux 2, is a Microsoft provided way of running a version of a Linux Operating System (OS), called Ubuntu, directly on Windows. More information on WSL2 can be found at [Microsoft: What is the Windows Subsystem for Linux?](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about) page. WSL2 actually provides a kernel, so it gives better performance than WSL1. You will need a few things to get it running, which we will express in this guide. 

Running WSL2 will create a separate linux-based file structure. You will be putting your files there and there only. Do not place course files in your Windows directories (Desktop, My Documents, etc), nor should you attempt to open them in Windows without good cause. We will reiterate this point later. 

### Pre-requisites
* Windows 10 or 11 computer
* Latest [Windows Updates](https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/update-windows-3c5ae7fc-9fb6-9af1-1984-b5e0412c556a#WindowsVersion=Windows_11) installed
* CPU Virtualization enabled in the BIOS

The last item of `"CPU Virtualization enabled in the BIOS"` is somewhat tricky and is done on a per-computer basis. We will proceed assuming that is already enabled, as it is most of the time on newer computers. We will give hints later on how to enable this when the dependent step is attempted. 

# Installation

## VS Code 
This workflow depends on using VS Code due to its robust Remote Development extension for WSL. To install it: 

1. [Download VSCode for Windows](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)
2. Open the VS Code installer
3. Installed to default or desired location
4. Make sure `Add to PATH` option is checked 
5. (Optional) Check other 3 options under "Other". This is recommended. 
6. Open VS Code
7. Click on the `Extension` menu on the left-most menu column, it looks like 4 blocks
8. Search for `ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack` extension, install it
9. Search for `ms-python.python` extension, install it
10. (Optional) Install a theme you like by searching for `@category:"themes" @sort:installs`
11. Wait until extensions are complete, close VS Code

## WSL2 + Ubuntu

### WSL2 Installation
This is arguably the hardest part of the installation. Luckily, Microsoft has pretty good documentation to help us! Do the following: 

1. Open your start menu
2. Search for `cmd`
3. Right click on `Command Prompt` and select `Run as Administrator` or similar 
4. Accept the security prompt, enter password if required
5. Run the following command: `wsl --install`
6. Pray that it works 
7. Restart your computer

If this didn't work, it's likely because your CPU Virtualization settings are `OFF` in your computer's BIOS. Your BIOS is a hardware level menu that is accessible only before Windows has started. When your computer is starting up, it will say something like "Press F2 to enter setup", or "Select F9 to enter BIOS", or perhaps "BIOS: DEL". They mean to repeatedly hit the mentioned key (F2, F9, or DEL in the example) to enter the menu. Common keys are the F (function) keys at the top of the keyboard, and ESC, DEL, HOME. To find out, try searching `your computer's model number + BIOS Key` on Google like [this](https://letmegooglethat.com/?q=dell+xps13+bios+key). If you enabled CPU virtualization, start again from step 1. If it was already enabled and `wsl --install` in Administrator mode is not working, please refer to the [Microsoft WSL Troubleshooting Guide](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/troubleshooting) and post on [#datasci-200-python](https://ucbischool.slack.com/archives/C5AL99BU6) asking for help with your specific error message/screenshot. 


### WSL2 Post-Installation Setup
If everything worked well and you've restarted your computer, you should be able to do the following: 

1. Go to your Windows Start Menu
2. Search for `Ubuntu`
3. Click the orange Ubuntu logo to launch WSL
4. Follow the setup instructions
5. Enter a username and password of your choice. This can be anything you want, just don't forget it as you will be typing it from time to time
6. Wait for Ubuntu to finish setting up
7. In the command line run the following commands: 
    * `sudo apt update` to update your environment 
    * `sudo apt upgrade -y` to install the newest packages 
    * `sudo apt install -y tree nano wget git` to install some helpful command line tools, including git if it's not already installed
8. Close the terminal completely


## Windows Terminal
A really nice application to have if you're on Windows 10 is the Windows Terminal shell. Install it by: 

### Installation
1. Try this link, it might prompt you to allow chrome to open the file type: 
    * https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/p/windows-terminal/9n0dx20hk701#activetab=pivot:overviewtab
2. If it works, install it and you're done 

If the URL didn't work, install it manually by: 
1. Open your start menu
2. Search for `store`
3. Open `Microsoft Store` or `Windows Store`
4. Search for `Windows Terminal`
5. Install the `Windows Terminal` app from Microsoft

### Setup
1. Open your start menu
2. Search for `Windows Terminal`
3. Open `Windows Terminal`
4. Click on the `down arrow` next to plus sign in the tab menu
5. Click on `Settings`
6. Under the `Startup` menu in the left column, `Default Profile` should be set to `Ubuntu` (with a little penguin!)
7. Press the `Save` button to save your settings
8. Navigate to the `Ubuntu` menu under `Profiles` in the left column
9. Click `Browse` in `Starting Directory`, a file explorer window will come in
10. In the top address bar, paste the following `\\wsl$\Ubuntu\home\` and hit enter
11. The file browser should show a single folder with your linux username, double click to enter it
12. Press `Select Folder` to confirm the selection
13. Verify that it reads `\\wsl$\Ubuntu\home\YOUR_USER_NAME`, so mine would read `\\wsl$\Ubuntu\home\mumin`
14. Press the `Save` button to save your settings
15. Close `Windows Terminal`


## Anaconda
You will be installing Anaconda on **Ubuntu** only. Do not install it on Windows unless you know what you're doing and why (it won't mess anything up, it will be confusing). 

1. Go to your Windows Start Menu
2. Search for `Windows Terminal`
3. Open `Windows Terminal`
4. Enter the following commands: 
    ```sh
    cd ~
    wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2021.11-Linux-x86_64.sh -O anaconda_setup.sh
    bash anaconda_setup.sh
    ```
5. At this point it will walk you through an installation process
6. Accept the licensing terms
7. (optional) Install Anaconda to `/home/[YOUR USERNAME HERE]/.anaconda3`
    * This will "hide" the folder, as it's an installation folder and not really meant to be manually browsed
    * Example: 
        ```sh
        Anaconda3 will now be installed into this location:
        /home/mumin/anaconda3

        - Press ENTER to confirm the location
        - Press CTRL-C to abort the installation
        - Or specify a different location below

        [/home/mumin/anaconda3] >>> /home/mumin/.anaconda3
        ```
8. Select "yes" to run `conda init`
9. Open a new tab in Windows Terminal, you should see `(base)` before your username in each command like: `(base) mumin@COMPUTER-ABCDEFG:~$`
10. Remove the setup script with `rm -f ~/anaconda_setup.sh`

Note: If none of the above has been set up, you can install Anaconda on Windows following the installation steps. After downloading and installing Anaconda on your computer, type the following command in Git Bash:
```sh
echo ". /c/Users/saturn/Anaconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh" >> ~/.bashrc
```
Replace saturn with your own username in the file path. You can look up the path in Windows Explorer. Close the current Git Bash window and open another Git Bash window, type `conda activate` then Anaconda is ready to use.

## GitHub
Git should already be installed on your system. Connecting `git` to GitHub.com is pretty straight forward and well documented [here](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/checking-for-existing-ssh-keys). Please refer to the docs if you have any issues, selecting the `Linux` tab for the correct set of instructions. In a nutshell, you need to run the following commands with **[your berkeley email on your github account](https://github.com/settings/emails)**: 

```sh
git config --global user.name "FIRST_NAME LAST_NAME"
git config --global user.email "YOUR_EMAIL@berkeley.edu"
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -f "~/.ssh/berkeley_github" -C "YOUR_EMAIL@berkeley.edu"
eval "$(ssh-agent -s)"
ssh-add -K ~/.ssh/berkeley_github
cat ~/.ssh/berkeley_github.pub
```

The last command should output something like this: 
    ```sh
    mumin@chroma:~/.ssh$ cat berkeley_github.pub
    ssh-ed25519 AAAAC3NzaC1lZDI1NTE5AAAAIMFK0N86w3G8ZE+iQPe649MVMa8/2+DGg6Ay4Yp3FEKd mumin@berkeley.edu
    ```
You want to copy only the second line into a new SSH key under your [Github.com Settings > SSH and GPG keys](https://github.com/settings/ssh/new). Title can be anything like `windows wsl - ubuntu`. 

Now test the connection with: `ssh -T git@github.com`

You should be able to clone your repository now.

1. Run the following commands to make a github folder in your home directory
    ```sh
    mkdir -p ~/github
    cd ~/github
    ```
2. Go to your repo on GitHub.com
3. Copy the URL except for `https://`
    * ex: github.com/UC-Berkeley-I-School/mids-datasci200-spring22-Dean-NakadaREPO
4. Add `git@` to the start of the URL
5. Add `.git` to the end of the URL
6. Clone the repository with `git clone`
    * ex: `git clone git@github.com:UC-Berkeley-I-School/mids-datasci-mumins-fake-repo.git`

There's also an SSH link generator under the `Code` button on Github.com. [See here for more info.](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/cloning-a-repository)


## Workflow

Coming soon. Short and sweet version is: 

1. Use WSL2 through Windows Terminal exclusively
2. `cd` to your github/repo directory 
3. Use `code .` to [open your repo from VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/remote/wsl)
4. Write code
5. Commit and push to github
6. Use `explorer.exe .` to open your repo in Windows, and drag and drop to grade scope. 