### W200: Introduction to Data Science Programming 

### Installing Packages

When working in Python, sometimes you will need to install an new package to get some additional functionality that someone else has built.

In this lecture, I will show you three different ways on how to install a package.

Let's start by making a new Anaconda environment:

```
conda create --name testenv

conda activate testenv
```

#### Install a package with conda:

The first installer to use is the conda package repository. This repository is curated by Anaconda and goes through some vetting which provides an extra level of security including checksums and virus scanning. You can read more at the conda security documentation: https://docs.anaconda.com/anaconda/reference/security/ . While Anaconda tries to make this channel secure there is still a small chance that malicious code is uploaded.

For this exercise, let's install a plotting library called seaborn:

`conda install seaborn`

Anaconda checks your environment when it states 'solving environment'  to make sure that all the needed compatible libraries are present or need to be downloaded. Sometimes libraries need to be downgraded for the next package to work. 

`Hit y or enter to proceed`

The next bit shows the downloading, extracting and installing of the packages.  Once this is done without any errors then the packages is installed.

#### Install a package with conda-forge:

If a package isn't available in the curated conda repository, the next spot to check is a conda channel called `conda-forge`. This is a community run github repo that contains uploaded conda packages. Often this channel has newer versions or recently released packages than what can be found on the regular conda channel. 

But security is also less strict on the conda-forge channel. Security is based on token between a trusted contributors and the repo as well as hash-checking of the packages.

First I'll check that the package isnt available in base anaconda:

`conda install cython`

To install from the conda-forge channel in anaconda:

`conda install -c conda-forge cython`

As you see there looks like a version of cython available but this also downgrades some of the other packages. 

#### Install a package with pip (PyPI):

The third option is to use a package repository called PyPI. To install packages from the PyPI repo, the command is called `pip`. There are two main reasons NOT to use this package installer unless its the only option:

1) Packages installed from PyPI are not included in the anaconda environment so when you install new packages the anaconda environment may take a while to resolve or not work (Anaconda recommends creating a new environment if you need to use `conda install` after a `pip install`)

2) Fewer security procedures. The PyPI package repo is not curated - that is anyone can upload a package. The installer does not verify signatures so could inadvertently run malicious code.

For this exercise, I'm trying to install facebook's Prophet package to do some timeseries forecasting: https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/installation.html#installation-in-python

From their webpage, the instructions state to use pip to install the package and to install pystan first. (at the time of this lecture pystan and prophet are not available in either conda or conda-forge; that might change as the packages become more popular):

In order to use pystan I need to install:

`conda install libpython m2w64-toolchain -c msys2`

Then:

`pip install pystan==2.19.1.1`

Once pystan is installed, I would then install prophet (but I wont for this exercise).

#### Recap:

My recommendation is to:

1) Try to use conda repo to install packages

2) If not available there, use the conda-forge channel

3) If still unable and absolutely need that package, use pip





