### W200: Introduction to Data Science Programming 

### Receiving Arguments into Python from the Command Line

#### What is sys.argv?

Sometimes when you are running a python script from the command line you might need to input some information from the command line to your program. Generally this is done with arguments after the program name instead of the input() command in python like:

`python my_file.py <arg1> <arg2> <arg3>`

Once again I'll be using VSCode as my integrated development environment or IDE. I'm going to make a simple program that just prints the arguments to start. First, I need to import the sys package because that contains the sys.argv functions.:

```
import sys
print(f"These are the passed arguments: {sys.argv}")
```

Then I'm going to run this from the command line and add some arguments:

`python arg_test.py A 1 B 2`

I'm spacing out each separate argument - and the program prints out all the arguments it received:

`These are the passed arguments: ['arg_test.py', 'A', '1', 'B', '2']`

A few observations here - first the arguments are returned as a list. Second the first argument (in index 0) is actually the program name. Third each argument is input as a string (so we might need to do a conversion)

#### Using sys.argv to change variables in your program

Now that I can see what sys.argv is doing, I'm going to make another script that takes those arguments as translates those to variables in my script. I'm going to make a simple calculator that inputs a price and returns the price + the sales tax. I'm going to have two arguments one that is the price of the item and the second is the tax rate:

```
import sys

price = sys.argv[1]
tax = sys.argv[2]

print(f"""Price: {price:10.2f}
Taxes: {price*tax:10.2f}
Total: {price + price*tax:10.2f}
""")
```

And then save it (I'll call it tax.py) run it from the command line:

`python tax.py 10 0.05`

Oops there is an error - Python is saying it cant force an str to be 2 decimal places. I forgot about all the arguments being input as string. Let's change line 3 and 4 to make the inputs floats and re-run:

```
import sys

price = float(sys.argv[1])
tax = float(sys.argv[2])

print(f"""Price: {price:10.2f}
Taxes: {price*tax:10.2f}
Total: {price + price*tax:10.2f}
""")
```

`python tax.py 10 0.05`

Ok now it works! 

What happens if I don't put in 2 arguments?

`python tax.py 10`

Another error because the program is looking for sys.argv[2] (the third element in the list) and there isn't one. I want to fix the program to do a quick check that all arguments are entered and if not then print a message and exit. I'm going to check the length but I could also do a try/except.

```
import sys

if len(sys.argv) < 3:
    print("This program needs 2 arguments separated by spaces.") 
    print("The first is the price, the second is the tax rate.")
    print("Example: python tip.py 10 0.05")
    sys.exit()

price = float(sys.argv[1])
tax = float(sys.argv[2])

print(f"""Price: {price:10.2f}
Taxes: {price*tax:10.2f}
Total: {price + price*tax:10.2f}
""")
```

Running it again:

`python tax.py 10`

Now it prints out a nice error message to the user. I want to check that it still works for the correct arguments:

`python tax.py 10 0.05`

And it does. I'm not going to code it here but there are a few more input checking that I would think about: 

- What happens if the user doesn't enter a number? 
- Should I put limits on how high the number for both the price and tax can be? 
- What happens if the user reverses the order and puts in the tax rate and then the price? 
- Would it be helpful if the user puts in a "?" as an argument to have a helpful message on how to use my script.

These are some considerations you will need to think about when designing your program!





