# Moving Around with the Command Line

The command line is a way that we interact with a computer by typing.  Nowadays, we're used to graphical interfaces, so you might wonder why we still need to use a command line.  Data scientists actually like the command line, because once you really get used to it, it can be fast and precise.  But also, a lot of the time, you'll be working with a server that's located far away, and you won't have a graphical interface.  The only way you'll be able to give the server instructions is through a command line.

Before we keep going, make sure that you have a unix-like shell installed.  The specific language we're using is called bash.  I'm working on a MAC, so I click on terminal to open a command line. 

The first thing we need to cover is how to move around the directory tree and get to files.

To check where you are, use the pwd command - print working directory.

`pwd`

Usually, you will start out in your home directory.  Let's say I want to know what's in this directory.  I can use the ls command.

`ls`

I can see some directories here (they don't have a period and a file extension).  If I want to move into a directory, I can use the cd command - change directory

`cd Documents`

To check that it worked, I can print the working directory again.

`pwd`

Sometimes, you need to go up the directory tree.  to do that, use two periods.

`cd ..`

`cd ..`

`cd ..`

`pwd`

We keep going up enough, and we'll find ourselves in the root directory.  Here, you'll find a lot of stuff that's important for the operating system to function.  For example, let's check out the bin folder.

`cd bin`

`ls`

In here you'll find some really important programs that are always available to you from the command line. 

We've been using relative paths so far.  We can also use absolute paths to move around.  Here's how we could jump back to our home directory.

`cd /Users/paul`

And I can similarly head back to the root directory.

`cd /`

On many Unix systems, there's a special character for the home directory, I can get there using a tilde.

`cd ~`

`pwd`

Let's take another look at the files in this directory.  Remember that we have the ls command.  But this time, I want to get more information about the files.  I can do that by adding a modifier.  ls -l.  The l stangs for long format.  A lot of bash commands work like this, you type the basic command, then a dash and one or more modifiers.

`ls -l`

You get a lot of info this way.
1. the owner of each file
2. the group the file belongs to
3. a string showing the permissions for the file.  the first three are about the owner, the next three are about the group, and the last three about everyone else.

Finally, it's a good time to mention how to get more information about these commands.  you can use the man command, for manual.

`man ls`

man pulls up documentation, and now we're in some sort of display program.  You can't type, but you can move around with the arrows or by typing u or d.  here, we can see the -l option for ls that we just used.  to get out of this display program, type q.
